Hello, and welcome to the Overview of Data Engine (Hyper) & File Store.
For this section, we are going to look at Data Engine, which we use the hyper database for.
We will discuss how the Data Engine is used, talk about federated query calls,
and discuss the functionality of File Store as well.
You can see here a visualization of how data engine and file store work with the rest of the data layer.
So first up, let’s talk about data engine.
The data engine handles the creation of and querying of extract files,
so it works together with the backgrounder and the file store process, and it may also be called by
the data server process when an extract is published.
VizQL Server will make calls to it when it needs to render a view that uses the extract as the data source.
So... what is Hyper?
Hyper is a column-based database and an in-memory process,
which has significant speed advantages over the older engine Tableau used, especially for databases with higher row counts.
Hyper is also called by other processes to create extracts.
The Hyper API can be used to automate interactions with .hyper Tableau extract files -
including to create new or open existing extract files.
Additionally, the Hyper API can add, delete, update or read data from .hyper files.
So, let's take a look at when data engine is used.
When viz portal publishes an extract, or backgrounder refreshes one, Data Engine is called to create the required .hyper file.
Data engine is also involved when we need to make federated query calls - a query of a database where we get back temporary data.
For example, if we need to retrieve data from two different datasources for a workbook, we’ll federate the query to the 2 datasources.
Data Engine is also tableau server’s query federation engine.
So, next up, let’s talk about File Store, which stores files.
Pretty straightforward! A little more precisely, it’s responsible for handling the storage
of extract files throughout the tableau server environment.
This means that for a multi-node environment, File Store will be copying and synchronizing files
between nodes in the cluster, so every worker has access to the extracts.
So, when a new extract is published or refreshed, a sync job will be created to copy the new file to the other workers with a file store.
When an extract is replaced by a new one with a full refresh,
file store will process the resulting reap job - deleting the extract from all configured nodes.
File store will also be called during backups to provide the extract files,
it will only backup one file store node during a backup operation in a multi-node environment.
Decommissioning puts the File Store instance into read-only mode and copies any unique data contained in
the instance to the other File Stores in the node cluster.
So, if a customer attempts to remove File Store without decommissioning, they will be prompted to decommission first.
Now, one thing to keep in mind is that Data Engine and File Store work closely together,
however they do not directly contact each other.
Instead, they both provide and get information to the data repository.
So, if data engine needs to know where an extract is stored, it queries the repository, not file store directly.
So, in summary, data engine is the federation query engine and the extract querying and creation component.
File Store is our replication component that copies extract files and keeps them synchronized in the nodes.